The following was included in the NCDOT report

Metabolomic profiles of mussels held at the study sites

The use of metabolomics is a new technique used in environmental assessment. Sometimes termed environmental metabolomics or ecometabolomics (Jones et al. 2013, Lankadurai et al. 2013, Macel et al. 2010, Sardans et al. 2011), little information is available on the metabolic profiles of many wild species. Our goal of this study was to establish a baseline metabolic “fingerprint” as it relates to A. raveneliana and L. fasciola in the Little Tennessee and Tuckasegee Rivers. We also intended to compare metabolomic profiles between sample sites and rivers to investigate whether there were nutritional deficiencies or impairments of metabolic pathways that could help to explain the decline in A. raveneliana populations in these rivers.

Fifty to 150 mg gill tissue was excised from 10 baseline A. raveneliana and 10 baseline L. fasciola at the beginning of the study. Fifty to 150 mg of tissues was also taken from each animal as they were removed from the cages for sampling, either at 6 mo or 12 mo after the initiation of the study. In total, gill tissue from 48 A. raveneliana and 52 L. fasciola was examined. Flash frozen samples were analyzed at the RTI, International, Metabolomics Core. The samples were homogenized in acetonitrile. Analysis was done in reversed phase UPLC-MS using both positive and negative ion methods on a Waters SYNAPT G2 Mass spec platform. Compound identification and quantification were performed using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics, Durham, NC) data analysis software. Further analysis was done using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 (Xia et al. 2015).

A total of 450 metabolites were identified in our study. A general metabolic “fingerprint” of the 25 most significant metabolites imparting a difference between species is presented in Figure 25. The compounds 24-Oxo-1alpha,23,25-trihydroxyvitamin D3, 23S,25,26-Trihydroxyvitamin D3 and tetrahydrocorticosterone were downregulated in many A. raveneliana baseline and all L. fasciola samples but upregulated in all other A. raveneliana samples except sample C498 from Tuckasegee River site 3. 24-Oxo-1alpha,23,25-trihydroxyvitamin D3 is a metabolite of vitamin D3. Also known as cholecalciferol, vitamin D3 is synthesized by the body and serves to regulate calcium uptake (Zhang and Naughton 2010). Tetrahydrocorticosterone is a glucocorticoid with anti-inflammatory and catabolic properties. Many phosopholipids (PE, PC, LysoPE, and LysoPC) were downregulated in A. raveneliana as were the prostaglandins Prostaglandin B2 and 20-hydroxy-PGE2. Phospholipids are components of the cell membrane and their distribution helps to maintain stability of these membranes. Prostaglandins have many functions such as vasoconstriction, vasodilation, and immunomodulation. Based on principal component analysis of all significant metabolites there was a difference between species but not within each species (Figure 29).

Glycogen, a primary energy store in bivalves, was significantly lower in A. raveneliana at each site after 6 months and in L. fasciola after 6 and 12 months when compared with the baseline values (Figure 30). It was also lower in mussels held in the Little Tennessee River than mussels held in the Tuckasegee River. Amino acids, small peptides, and nucleotides along with glucocorticoids in both species were elevated above baseline, which suggested tissue catabolism. Essential fatty acid levels were lower compared to baselines. These results are consistent with a decrease in nutritional health seen in the sentinel animals during our study.
